# Sourcing & Managing data

- Identify and evaluate market, fundamental, and alternative data sources containing alpha signals that do not decay too quickly.

- Deploy or access a cloud-based scalable data infrastructure and analytical tools like Hadoop or Spark to facilitate fast, flexible data access.

- Carefully manage and curate data to avoid look-ahead bias by adjusting it to the desired frequency on a point-in-time basis. This means that data should reflect only information available and known at the given time. ML algorithms trained on distorted historical data will almost certainly fail during live trading.
 

### Alpha factors

Alpha factors are designed to extract signals from data to predict returns for a given investment universe over the trading horizon. A typical factor takes on a single value for each asset when evaluated at a given point in time, but it may combine one or several input variables or time periods. 

Research

- Get Predictive Data
- Define Investment Universe
- Design Alpha Factors
- Combine Alpha Factors

Execution

- Optimize Portfolio
- Execute Trades

### Market Data

Market data is the product of how traders place orders for a financial instrument directly or through intermediaries on one of the numerous marketplaces, how they are processed, and how prices are set by matching demand and supply. As a result, the data reflects the institutional environment of trading venues, including the rules and regulations that govern orders, trade execution, and price formation. See Harris (2003) for a global overview and Jones (2018) for details on the U.S. market.

Algorithmic traders use algorithms, including ML, to analyze the flow of buy and sell orders and the resulting volume and price statistics to extract trade signals that capture insights into, for example, demand-supply dynamics or the behavior of certain market participants.

### Market microstructure – the nuts and bolts

Market microstructure studies how the institutional environment affects the trading process and shapes outcomes like price discovery, bid-ask spreads and quotes, intraday trading behavior, and transaction costs (Madhavan 2000; 2002). It is one of the fastest- growing fields of financial research, propelled by the rapid development of algorithmic and electronic trading.

Today, hedge funds sponsor in-house analysts to track the rapidly evolving, complex details and ensure execution at the best possible market prices and design strategies that exploit market frictions. We will provide only a brief overview of these key concepts before we dive into the data generated by trading. The references contain several sources that treat this subject in great detail.

