# Computer Architecture

Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU)
Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC)
Electronic Discrete Variable Automatic Computer (EDVAC)
general-purpose registers (GRPs)

### The calcuator model of computing

A computer takes a stream of instructions (code) and a stream of data as input
and it produces a stream of results as output.

### The File-Clerk model of computing

A computer is  a device that shuffles numbers around from place to place,
reading, writing, erasing, and rewriting different numbers in different locations
according to a set of inputs [read], a fixed set of rules for processing those
inputs [modify], and a prior history of all the inputs that the computer has
seen since it was last reset [write], until a predefined set of criteria are
met that cause the computer to halt.

### The Stored-Program Computer

All computers consist of at least three fundamental typesof structures needed
to carry out the read-modify-write sequence:

#### Storage

To say that a copmuter "reads" and "writes" numbers implies that there is at least
one number-holding structure that is read from and writes to. All computers have
a place to put numbers - a storage area that can be read from and written to.

#### Arithmetic logic unit (ALU)

Similarly, to say that a computer "modifies" numbers implies that the computer
contains a device for performing operations on numbers. This device is the ALU,
and it's the part that performs arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction etc...)
on numbers from the storage area.

Read from storage area, caluclate in ALU, write to storage via ALU output port.
storage -> ALU -> storage

#### Bus

In order to move numbers between the ALU and storage, some means of transmitting
numbers is required. Thus, the ALU reads from and writes to the data storage area
by means of the data bus. Which is a network of transmission lines for shuttling
numbers around inside a computer. Instructions travel into the ALU via the
instruction bus. The memory bus transfers data between main memory and registers.

#### The Register File

CPU limited surface area constrain the size of teh storage area that we can stick
next to the ALU. This means most computers have a relatively small number of
very fast data storage locations attached to the ALU. These storage locations
are called registers. Arrayed in a storage structure called a register file.

An operation example:
- Obtain two numbers (input operands) from two source registers
- Add the numbers
- Place the results back in the destination register

#### General Instruction Types

In modern RISC microprocessors, the act of moving data between memory and the
registers in under the expplicit control of the code stream, or program.

- a load instruction to move the two numbers from memory into the registers
- an add instruction to tell the ALU to add the two numbers
- a store instruction to tell the computer to place the result of the addition
  back into memory, overwriting whatever was previously there

Arithmetic instructions - add, sub, mul, div

Memory-access instructions - load, store

Move into A the contents of memory located at D and 13 into B
load #D, A (where D = 12)
load #13, B

Add the numbers together and store in register C
add A, B, C

Write the result of the addition from register C into memory.
store C, #14

#### Register-Relative Addressing

In real world programs, loads and stores most often use register-relative addressing,
which is a way of specifying memory addresses relative to a register that contains
a fixed base address.

A data segment is a block of contiguous memory cells that a program stores all of
its data in. So if a programmer knows a data segments starting address (base address)
in memory, he or she can access all of the other memory locations in that segment
using this formula.

base address + offset

Where offset is the distance in bytes of the desired memory location from the
data segment's base address.

address calculation in place of absolute addressing
load #(D + 108), A
store B, #(D + 108)

Becuse both memory addresses and regular integer numbers are stored in the same
registers, these registers are called general-purpose registers (GRPs).

### Clock

Instructions are performed according to the pulse of the clock that governs every action the processor takes. The clock pulse, which is generated by a clock generator module on the motherboard and is fed into the processor from the outside, times the functioning of the processor so that all three steps of the fetch-execute loop are completed in exactly one beat of the clock which means a new instruction is fetched on each beat of the clock.

### Booting Up

When a computer is first powered on there is no program in memory. The processor, in its powered-on default state, is hard-wired to fetch its first instruction from a predetermined address in memory. The first instruction, which is loaded into the processors instruction register, is the first line of a program called the BIOS that lives in a special set of storage locations - a small read-only memory (ROM) module attached to the motherboard.

It's the job of the BIOS to perform basic tests of the RAM and peripherals in order to verify that everything is working properly. Then the boot process can continue.

At the end of the BIOS program lies a jump instruction, the target of which is the location of the bootloader program handing off control of the system to this second program whose job it is to search for and load the computer's operating system from the hard disk.

### Program Execution Time and Completion Rate

In general the program's execution time is equal to the total number of instructions in the program divided by the processor's instruction completion rate (number of instructions completed per nanosecond), as in the following equation.

program execution time = number of instructions in program / instruction completion rate

#### Instruction throughput

Instruction throughput is the number of instructions that the processor completes each clock cycle also referred to as instructions per clock (IPC).

A higher instruction throughput translates into a higher instruction completion rate, and hense better performance.

#### Maximum theoretical instruction throughput

The theoretical maximum number of instructions that the processor can finish executing on each clock cycle. Simple pipelined and non-pipelined processors is always one instruction per cycle (one instruction / clock or one IPC).

#### Average instruction throughput

The average number of instructions per clock (IPC) that the processor has actually completed over a certain number of cycles.
